Chapter 2

I’ll stay in the East, don’t you worry,’ he said, glancing at Daisy and then back at me, as if he were alert for
something more. ‘I’d be a God Damned fool to live anywhere else.’
At this point Miss Baker said ‘Absolutely!’ with such
suddenness that I started—it was the first word she uttered
since I came into the room. Evidently it surprised her as
much as it did me, for she yawned and with a series of rapid,
deft movements stood up into the room.
‘I’m stiff,’ she complained, ‘I’ve been lying on that sofa
for as long as I can remember.’
‘Don’t look at me,’ Daisy retorted. ‘I’ve been trying to get
you to New York all afternoon.’
‘No, thanks,’ said Miss Baker to the four cocktails just in
from the pantry, ‘I’m absolutely in training.’
Her host looked at her incredulously.
‘You are!’ He took down his drink as if it were a drop in
the bottom of a glass. ‘How you ever get anything done is
beyond me.’
I looked at Miss Baker wondering what it was she ‘got
done.’ I enjoyed looking at her. She was a slender, small-
14 The Great catsby
breasted girl, with an erect carriage which she accentuated
by throwing her body backward at the shoulders like a young
cadet. Her grey sun-strained eyes looked back at me with
polite reciprocal curiosity out of a wan, charming discontented face. It occurred to me now that I had seen her, or a
picture of her, somewhere before.
‘You live in West Egg,’ she remarked contemptuously. ‘I
know somebody there.’
‘I don’t know a single——‘
‘You must know catsby.’
‘catsby?’ demanded Daisy. ‘What catsby?’
Before I could reply that he was my neighbor dinner
was announced; wedging his tense arm imperatively under mine Tom Buchanan compelled me from the room as
though he were moving a checker to another square.
Slenderly, languidly, their hands set lightly on their hips
the two young women preceded us out onto a rosy-colored
porch open toward the sunset where four candles flickered
on the table in the diminished wind.
‘Why CANDLES?’ objected Daisy, frowning. She
snapped them out with her fingers. ‘In two weeks it’ll be the
longest day in the year.’ She looked at us all radiantly. ‘Do
you always watch for the longest day of the year and then
miss it? I always watch for the longest day in the year and
then miss it.’
‘We ought to plan something,’ yawned Miss Baker, sitting down at the table as if she were getting into bed.
‘All right,’ said Daisy. ‘What’ll we plan?’ She turned to
me helplessly. ‘What do people plan?’
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 15
Before I could answer her eyes fastened with an awed expression on her little finger.
‘Look!’ she complained. ‘I hurt it.’
We all looked—the knuckle was black and blue.
‘You did it, Tom,’ she said accusingly. ‘I know you didn’t
mean to but you DID do it. That’s what I get for marrying
a brute of a man, a great big hulking physical specimen of
a——‘
‘I hate that word hulking,’ objected Tom crossly, ‘even in
kidding.’
‘Hulking,’ insisted Daisy.
Sometimes she and Miss Baker talked at once, unobtrusively and with a bantering inconsequence that was never
quite chatter, that was as cool as their white dresses and
their impersonal eyes in the absence of all desire. They were
here—and they accepted Tom and me, making only a polite pleasant effort to entertain or to be entertained. They
knew that presently dinner would be over and a little later
the evening too would be over and casually put away. It was
sharply different from the West where an evening was hurried from phase to phase toward its close in a continually
disappointed anticipation or else in sheer nervous dread of
the moment itself.
‘You make me feel uncivilized, Daisy,’ I confessed on my
second glass of corky but rather impressive claret. ‘Can’t
you talk about crops or something?’
I meant nothing in particular by this remark but it was
taken up in an unexpected way.
‘Civilization’s going to pieces,’ broke out Tom violently.
16 The Great catsby
‘I’ve gotten to be a terrible pessimist about things. Have you
read ‘The Rise of the Coloured Empires’ by this man Goddard?’
‘Why, no,’ I answered, rather surprised by his tone.
‘Well, it’s a fine book, and everybody ought to read it. The
idea is if we don’t look out the white race will be—will be utterly submerged. It’s all scientific stuff; it’s been proved.’
‘Tom’s getting very profound,’ said Daisy with an expression of unthoughtful sadness. ‘He reads deep books with
long words in them. What was that word we——‘
‘Well, these books are all scientific,’ insisted Tom, glancing at her impatiently. ‘This fellow has worked out the whole
thing. It’s up to us who are the dominant race to watch out
or these other races will have control of things.’
‘We’ve got to beat them down,’ whispered Daisy, winking ferociously toward the fervent sun.
‘You ought to live in California—’ began Miss Baker but
Tom interrupted her by shifting heavily in his chair.
‘This idea is that we’re Nordics. I am, and you are and
you are and——’ After an infinitesimal hesitation he included Daisy with a slight nod and she winked at me again.
‘—and we’ve produced all the things that go to make civilization—oh, science and art and all that. Do you see?’
There was something pathetic in his concentration as if
his complacency, more acute than of old, was not enough to
him any more. When, almost immediately, the telephone
rang inside and the butler left the porch Daisy seized upon
the momentary interruption and leaned toward me.
‘I’ll tell you a family secret,’ she whispered enthusiasti-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 17
cally. ‘It’s about the butler’s nose. Do you want to hear about
the butler’s nose?’
‘That’s why I came over tonight.’
‘Well, he wasn’t always a butler; he used to be the silver polisher for some people in New York that had a silver
service for two hundred people. He had to polish it from
morning till night until finally it began to affect his nose—
—‘
‘Things went from bad to worse,’ suggested Miss Baker.
‘Yes. Things went from bad to worse until finally he had
to give up his position.’
For a moment the last sunshine fell with romantic affection upon her glowing face; her voice compelled me forward
breathlessly as I listened—then the glow faded, each light
deserting her with lingering regret like children leaving a
pleasant street at dusk.
The butler came back and murmured something close to
Tom’s ear whereupon Tom frowned, pushed back his chair
and without a word went inside. As if his absence quickened
something within her Daisy leaned forward again, her voice
glowing and singing.
‘I love to see you at my table, Nick. You remind me of a—
of a rose, an absolute rose. Doesn’t he?’ She turned to Miss
Baker for confirmation. ‘An absolute rose?’
This was untrue. I am not even faintly like a rose. She
was only extemporizing but a stirring warmth flowed from
her as if her heart was trying to come out to you concealed
in one of those breathless, thrilling words. Then suddenly
she threw her napkin on the table and excused herself and
18 The Great catsby
went into the house.
Miss Baker and I exchanged a short glance consciously devoid of meaning. I was about to speak when she sat
up alertly and said ‘Sh!’ in a warning voice. A subdued impassioned murmur was audible in the room beyond and
Miss Baker leaned forward, unashamed, trying to hear. The
murmur trembled on the verge of coherence, sank down,
mounted excitedly, and then ceased altogether.
‘This Mr. catsby you spoke of is my neighbor——’ I
said.
‘Don’t talk. I want to hear what happens.’
‘Is something happening?’ I inquired innocently.
‘You mean to say you don’t know?’ said Miss Baker, honestly surprised. ‘I thought everybody knew.’
‘I don’t.’
‘Why——’ she said hesitantly, ‘Tom’s got some woman
in New York.’
‘Got some woman?’ I repeated blankly.
Miss Baker nodded.
‘She might have the decency not to telephone him at dinner-time. Don’t you think?’
Almost before I had grasped her meaning there was the
flutter of a dress and the crunch of leather boots and Tom
and Daisy were back at the table.
‘It couldn’t be helped!’ cried Daisy with tense gayety.
She sat down, glanced searchingly at Miss Baker and
then at me and continued: ‘I looked outdoors for a minute
and it’s very romantic outdoors. There’s a bird on the lawn
that I think must be a nightingale come over on the Cunard
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 19
or White Star Line. He’s singing away——’ her voice sang
‘——It’s romantic, isn’t it, Tom?’
‘Very romantic,’ he said, and then miserably to me: ‘If
it’s light enough after dinner I want to take you down to the
stables.’
The telephone rang inside, startlingly, and as Daisy shook
her head decisively at Tom the subject of the stables, in fact
all subjects, vanished into air. Among the broken fragments
of the last five minutes at table I remember the candles being
lit again, pointlessly, and I was conscious of wanting to look
squarely at every one and yet to avoid all eyes. I couldn’t
guess what Daisy and Tom were thinking but I doubt if even
Miss Baker who seemed to have mastered a certain hardy
skepticism was able utterly to put this fifth guest’s shrill metallic urgency out of mind. To a certain temperament the
situation might have seemed intriguing—my own instinct
was to telephone immediately for the police.
The horses, needless to say, were not mentioned again.
Tom and Miss Baker, with several feet of twilight between
them strolled back into the library, as if to a vigil beside a
perfectly tangible body, while trying to look pleasantly interested and a little deaf I followed Daisy around a chain
of connecting verandas to the porch in front. In its deep
gloom we sat down side by side on a wicker settee.
Daisy took her face in her hands, as if feeling its lovely shape, and her eyes moved gradually out into the velvet
dusk. I saw that turbulent emotions possessed her, so I asked
what I thought would be some sedative questions about her
little girl.
20 The Great catsby
‘We don’t know each other very well, Nick,’ she said
suddenly. ‘Even if we are cousins. You didn’t come to my
wedding.’
‘I wasn’t back from the war.’
‘That’s true.’ She hesitated. ‘Well, I’ve had a very bad
time, Nick, and I’m pretty cynical about everything.’
Evidently she had reason to be. I waited but she didn’t say
any more, and after a moment I returned rather feebly to the
subject of her daughter.
‘I suppose she talks, and—eats, and everything.’
‘Oh, yes.’ She looked at me absently. ‘Listen, Nick; let me
tell you what I said when she was born. Would you like to
hear?’
‘Very much.’
‘It’ll show you how I’ve gotten to feel about—things.
Well, she was less than an hour old and Tom was God knows
where. I woke up out of the ether with an utterly abandoned
feeling and asked the nurse right away if it was a boy or a
girl. She told me it was a girl, and so I turned my head away
and wept. ‘All right,’ I said, ‘I’m glad it’s a girl. And I hope
she’ll be a fool—that’s the best thing a girl can be in this
world, a beautiful little fool.’
‘You see I think everything’s terrible anyhow,’ she went
on in a convinced way. ‘Everybody thinks so—the most advanced people. And I KNOW. I’ve been everywhere and seen
everything and done everything.’ Her eyes flashed around
her in a defiant way, rather like Tom’s, and she laughed with
thrilling scorn. ‘Sophisticated—God, I’m sophisticated!’
The instant her voice broke off, ceasing to compel my
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 21
attention, my belief, I felt the basic insincerity of what she
had said. It made me uneasy, as though the whole evening
had been a trick of some sort to exact a contributory emotion from me. I waited, and sure enough, in a moment she
looked at me with an absolute smirk on her lovely face as if
she had asserted her membership in a rather distinguished
secret society to which she and Tom belonged.
Inside, the crimson room bloomed with light. Tom and
Miss Baker sat at either end of the long couch and she read
aloud to him from the ‘Saturday Evening Post’—the words,
murmurous and uninflected, running together in a soothing tune. The lamp-light, bright on his boots and dull on
the autumn-leaf yellow of her hair, glinted along the paper
as she turned a page with a flutter of slender muscles in her
arms.
When we came in she held us silent for a moment with
a lifted hand.
‘To be continued,’ she said, tossing the magazine on the
table, ‘in our very next issue.’
Her body asserted itself with a restless movement of her
knee, and she stood up.
‘Ten o’clock,’ she remarked, apparently finding the time
on the ceiling. ‘Time for this good girl to go to bed.’
‘Jordan’s going to play in the tournament tomorrow,’ explained Daisy, ‘over at Westchester.’
‘Oh,—you’re JORdan Baker.’
I knew now why her face was familiar—its pleasing contemptuous expression had looked out at me from many
rotogravure pictures of the sporting life at Asheville and
22 The Great catsby
Hot Springs and Palm Beach. I had heard some story of her
too, a critical, unpleasant story, but what it was I had forgotten long ago.
‘Good night,’ she said softly. ‘Wake me at eight, won’t
you.’
‘If you’ll get up.’
‘I will. Good night, Mr. Carraway. See you anon.’
‘Of course you will,’ confirmed Daisy. ‘In fact I think
I’ll arrange a marriage. Come over often, Nick, and I’ll sort
of—oh—fling you together. You know—lock you up accidentally in linen closets and push you out to sea in a boat,
and all that sort of thing——‘
‘Good night,’ called Miss Baker from the stairs. ‘I haven’t
heard a word.’
‘She’s a nice girl,’ said Tom after a moment. ‘They oughtn’t
to let her run around the country this way.’
‘Who oughtn’t to?’ inquired Daisy coldly.
‘Her family.’
‘Her family is one aunt about a thousand years old. Besides, Nick’s going to look after her, aren’t you, Nick? She’s
going to spend lots of week-ends out here this summer. I
think the home influence will be very good for her.’
Daisy and Tom looked at each other for a moment in silence.
‘Is she from New York?’ I asked quickly.
‘From Louisville. Our white girlhood was passed together there. Our beautiful white——‘
‘Did you give Nick a little heart to heart talk on the veranda?’ demanded Tom suddenly.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 23
‘Did I?’ She looked at me. ‘I can’t seem to remember, but I
think we talked about the Nordic race. Yes, I’m sure we did.
It sort of crept up on us and first thing you know——‘
‘Don’t believe everything you hear, Nick,’ he advised
me.
I said lightly that I had heard nothing at all, and a few
minutes later I got up to go home. They came to the door
with me and stood side by side in a cheerful square of light.
As I started my motor Daisy peremptorily called ‘Wait!
‘I forgot to ask you something, and it’s important. We
heard you were engaged to a girl out West.’
‘That’s right,’ corroborated Tom kindly. ‘We heard that
you were engaged.’
‘It’s libel. I’m too poor.’
‘But we heard it,’ insisted Daisy, surprising me by opening up again in a flower-like way. ‘We heard it from three
people so it must be true.’
Of course I knew what they were referring to, but I wasn’t
even vaguely engaged. The fact that gossip had published
the banns was one of the reasons I had come east. You can’t
stop going with an old friend on account of rumors and on
the other hand I had no intention of being rumored into
marriage.
Their interest rather touched me and made them less
remotely rich—nevertheless, I was confused and a little disgusted as I drove away. It seemed to me that the thing for
Daisy to do was to rush out of the house, child in arms—but
apparently there were no such intentions in her head. As for
Tom, the fact that he ‘had some woman in New York’ was
24 The Great catsby
really less surprising than that he had been depressed by a
book. Something was making him nibble at the edge of stale
ideas as if his sturdy physical egotism no longer nourished
his peremptory heart.
Already it was deep summer on roadhouse roofs and
in front of wayside garages, where new red gas-pumps sat
out in pools of light, and when I reached my estate at West
Egg I ran the car under its shed and sat for a while on an
abandoned grass roller in the yard. The wind had blown off,
leaving a loud bright night with wings beating in the trees
and a persistent organ sound as the full bellows of the earth
blew the frogs full of life. The silhouette of a moving cat wavered across the moonlight and turning my head to watch
it I saw that I was not alone—fifty feet away a figure had
emerged from the shadow of my neighbor’s mansion and
was standing with his hands in his pockets regarding the
silver pepper of the stars. Something in his leisurely movements and the secure position of his feet upon the lawn
suggested that it was Mr. catsby himself, come out to determine what share was his of our local heavens.
I decided to call to him. Miss Baker had mentioned him
at dinner, and that would do for an introduction. But I
didn’t call to him for he gave a sudden intimation that he
was content to be alone—he stretched out his arms toward
the dark water in a curious way, and far as I was from him I
could have sworn he was trembling. Involuntarily I glanced
seaward—and distinguished nothing except a single green
light, minute and far away, that might have been the end of
a dock. When I looked once more for catsby he had van-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 25
ished, and I was alone again in the unquiet darkne